<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER III</h2>
<h3>VIA DOLOROSA</h3>
</div>
<p>In their baggy, lapping trousers and crimson caps, each
carrying a bundle and a rug under his arm, Shakib
and Khalid are smuggled through the port of Beirut
at night, and safely rowed to the steamer. Indeed,
we are in a country where one can not travel without
a passport, or a password, or a little pass-money.
And the boatmen and officials of the Ottoman Empire
can better read a gold piece than a passport. So,
Shakib and Khalid, not having the latter, slip in a few
of the former, and are smuggled through. One more
longing, lingering glance behind, and the dusky peaks
of the Lebanons, beyond which their native City of
Baal is sleeping in peace, recede from view. On the
high sea of hope and joy they sail; “under the Favonian
wind of enthusiasm, on the friendly billows of
boyish dreams,” they roll. Ay, and they sing for joy.
On and on, to the gold-swept shores of distant lands,
to the generous cities and the bounteous fields of the
West, to the Paradise of the World––to America.</p>
<p>We need not dwell too much with our Scribe, on
the repulsive details of the story of the voyage. We
ourselves have known a little of the suffering and
misery which emigrants must undergo, before they
reach that Western Paradise of the Oriental imagination.

How they are huddled like sheep on deck from
Beirut to Marseilles; and like cattle transported
under hatches across the Atlantic; and bullied and
browbeaten by rough disdainful stewards; and made
to pay for a leathery gobbet of beef and a slice of
black flint-like bread: all this we know. But that
New World paradise is well worth these passing privations.</p>
<p>The second day at sea, when the two Baalbekian
lads are snug on deck, their rugs spread out not far
from the stalls in which Syrian cattle are shipped to
Egypt and Arab horses to Europe or America, they
rummage in their bags––and behold, a treat! Shakib
takes out his favourite poet Al-Mutanabbi, and Khalid,
his favourite bottle, the choicest of the Ksarah distillery
of the Jesuits. For this whilom donkey-boy will begin
by drinking the wine of these good Fathers and
then their––blood! His lute is also with him; and
he will continue to practise the few lessons which the
bulbuls of the poplar groves have taught him. No, he
cares not for books. And so, he uncorks the bottle,
hands it to Shakib his senior, then takes a nip himself,
and, thrumming his lute strings, trolls a few
doleful pieces of Arabic song. “In these,” he would
say to Shakib, pointing to the bottle and the lute, “is
real poetry, and not in that book with which you
would kill me.” And Shakib, in stingless sarcasm,
would insist that the music in Al-Mutanabbi’s lines
is just a little more musical than Khalid’s thrumming.
They quarrel about this. And in justice to both, we
give the following from the <i>Histoire Intime</i>.
</p>
<p>“When we left our native land,” Shakib writes,
“my literary bent was not shared in the least by
Khalid. I had gone through the higher studies which,
in our hedge-schools and clerical institutions, do not
reach a very remarkable height. Enough of French
to understand the authors tabooed by our Jesuit professors,––the
Voltaires, the Rousseaus, the Diderots;
enough of Arabic to enable one to parse and analyse
the verse of Al-Mutanabbi; enough of Church History
to show us, not how the Church wielded the sword
of persecution, but how she was persecuted herself by
the pagans and barbarians of the earth;––of these
and such like consists the edifying curriculum. Now,
of this high phase of education, Khalid was thoroughly
immune. But his intuitive sagacity was often remarkable,
and his humour, sweet and pathetic. Once when
I was reading aloud some of the Homeric effusions of
Al-Mutanabbi, he said to me, as he was playing his
lute, ‘In the heart of this,’ pointing to the lute, ‘and
in the heart of me, there be more poetry than in that
book with which you would kill me.’ And one day,
after wandering clandestinely through the steamer, he
comes to me with a gesture of surprise and this: ‘Do
you know, there are passengers who sleep in bunks below,
over and across each other? I saw them,
billah! And I was told they pay more than we do
for such a low passage––the fools! Think on it. I
peeped into a little room, a dingy, smelling box, which
had in it six berths placed across and above each other
like the shelves of the reed manchons we build for our
silk-worms at home. I wouldn’t sleep in one of them,

billah! even though they bribe me. This bovine fragrance,
the sight of these fine horses, the rioting of the
wind above us, should make us forget the brutality
of the stewards. Indeed, I am as content, as
comfortable here, as are their Excellencies in what is
called the Salon. Surely, we are above them––at
least, in the night. What matters it, then, if ours is
called the Fourth Class and theirs the Primo.
Wherever one is happy, Shakib, there is the Primo.’”</p>
<p>But this happy humour is assailed at Marseilles. His
placidity and stolid indifference are rudely shaken by
the sharpers, who differ only from the boatmen of Beirut
in that they wear pantaloons and intersperse their
Arabic with a jargon of French. These brokers, like
rapacious bats, hover around the emigrant and before
his purse is opened for the fourth time, the trick is
done. And with what ceremony, you shall see.
From the steamer the emigrant is led to a dealer in
frippery, where he is required to doff his baggy
trousers and crimson cap, and put on a suit of linsey-woolsey
and a hat of hispid felt: end of First Act;
open the purse. From the dealer of frippery, spick
and span from top to toe, he is taken to the hostelry,
where he is detained a fortnight, sometimes a
month, on the pretext of having to wait for the best
steamer: end of Second Act; open the purse.
From the hostelry at last to the steamship agent,
where they secure for him a third-class passage on a
fourth-class ship across the Atlantic: end of Third Act;
open the purse. And now that the purse is almost
empty, the poor emigrant is permitted to leave. They

send him to New York with much gratitude in his
heart and a little trachoma in his eyes. The result being
that a month later they have to look into such eyes
again. But the purse of the distressed emigrant now
being empty,––empty as his hopes and dreams,––the
rapacious bats hover not around him, and the door of
the verminous hostelry is shut in his face. He is left
to starve on the western shore of the Mediterranean.</p>
<p>Ay, even the droll humour and stolidity of Khalid,
are shaken, aroused, by the ghoulish greed, the fell inhumanity
of these sharpers. And Shakib from his
cage of fancy lets loose upon them his hyenas of satire.
In a squib describing the bats and the voyage he says:
“The voyage to America is the Via Dolorosa of the
emigrant; and the Port of Beirut, the verminous
hostelries of Marseilles, the Island of Ellis in New
York, are the three stations thereof. And if your hopes
are not crucified at the third and last station, you pass
into the Paradise of your dreams. If they are crucified,
alas! The gates of the said Paradise will be shut
against you; the doors of the hostelries will be slammed
in your face; and with a consolation and a vengeance
you will throw yourself at the feet of the sea in whose
bosom some charitable Jonah will carry you to your
native strands.”</p>
<p>And when the emigrant has a surplus of gold, when
his capital is such as can not be dissipated on a suit of
shoddy, a fortnight’s lodging, and a passage across the
Atlantic, the ingenious ones proceed with the Fourth
Act of <i>Open Thy Purse</i>. “Instead of starting in
New York as a peddler,” they say, unfolding before

him one of their alluring schemes, “why not do so
as a merchant?” And the emigrant opens his purse
for the fourth time in the office of some French manufacturer,
where he purchases a few boxes of trinketry,––scapulars,
prayer-beads, crosses, jewelry, gewgaws,
and such like,––all said to be made in the Holy
Land. These he brings over with him as his stock in
trade.</p>
<p>Now, Khalid and Shakib, after passing a fortnight
in Marseilles, and going through the Fourth Act of
the Sorry Show, find their dignity as merchants rudely
crushed beneath the hatches of the Atlantic steamer.
For here, even the pleasure of sleeping on deck is
denied them. The Atlantic Ocean would not permit
of it. Indeed, everybody has to slide into their stivy
bunks to save themselves from its rising wrath. A
fortnight of such unutterable misery is quite supportable,
however, if one continues to cherish the Paradise
already mentioned. But in this dark, dingy
smelling hole of the steerage, even the poets cease to
dream. The boatmen of Beirut and the sharpers of
Marseilles we could forget; but in this grave among
a hundred and more of its kind, set over and across
each other, neither the lute nor the little that remained
in that Ksarah bottle, could bring us any solace.</p>
<p>We are told that Khalid took up his lute but once
throughout the voyage. And this when they were
permitted one night to sleep on deck. We are also
informed that Khalid had a remarkable dream, which,
to our Scribe at least, is not meaningless. And who
of us, thou silly Scribe, did not in his boyhood tell his

dreams to his mother, who would turn them in her
interpretation inside out? But Khalid, we are
assured, continued to cherish the belief, even in
his riper days, that when you dream you are in Jannat,
for instance, you must be prepared to go through
Juhannam the following day. A method of interpretation
as ancient as Joseph, to be sure. But we quote
the dream to show that Khalid should not have followed
the setting sun. He should have turned his
face toward the desert.</p>
<p>They slept on deck that night. They drank the
wine of the Jesuits, repeated, to the mellow strains of
the lute, the song of the bulbuls, intoned the verses of
Al-Mutanabbi, and, wrapping themselves in their
rugs, fell asleep. But in the morning they were
rudely jostled from their dreams by a spurt from the
hose of the sailors washing the deck. Complaining
not, they straggle down to their bunks to change their
clothes. And Khalid, as he is doing this, implores
Shakib not to mention to him any more that New-World
paradise. “For I have dreamt last night,”
he continues, “that, in the multicoloured robes of
an Arab amir, on a caparisoned dromedary, at the
head of an immense multitude of people, I was riding
through the desert. Whereto and wherefrom, I know
not. But those who followed me seemed to know;
for they cried, ‘Long have we waited for thee, now
we shall enter in peace.’ And at every oasis we
passed, the people came to the gate to meet us, and,
prostrating themselves before me, kissed the fringe of
my garment. Even the women would touch my boots

and kiss their hands, exclaiming, ‘<i>Allahu akbar!</i>’
And the palm trees, billah! I could see bending
towards us that we might eat of their fruits, and the
springs seemed to flow with us into the desert that we
might never thirst. Ay, thus in triumph we marched
from one camp to another, from one oasis to the next,
until we reached the City on the Hills of the Cedar
Groves. Outside the gate, we were met by the most
beautiful of its tawny women, and four of these surrounded
my camel and took the reins from my hand.
I was then escorted through the gates, into the City,
up to the citadel, where I was awaited by their Princess.
And she, taking a necklace of cowries from a bag
that hung on her breast, placed it on my head, saying,
‘I crown thee King of––’ But I could not
hear the rest, which was drowned by the cheering of
the multitudes. And the cheering, O Shakib, was
drowned by the hose of the sailors. Oh, that hose! Is
it not made in the paradise you harp upon, the paradise
we are coming to? Never, therefore, mention
it to me more.”</p>
<p>This is the dream, at once simple and symbolic,
which begins to worry Khalid. “For in the evening
of the day he related it to me,” writes Shakib, “I
found him sitting on the edge of his bunk brooding
over I know not what. It was the first time he had
the blues. Nay, it was the first time he looked pensive
and profound. And upon asking him the reason
for this, he said, ‘I am thinking of the paper-boats
which I used to sail down the stream in Baalbek, and
that makes me sad.’”
</p>
<p>How strange! And yet, this first event recorded by
our Scribe, in which Khalid is seen struggling with
the mysterious and unknown, is most significant.
Another instance, showing a latent phase, hitherto dormant,
in his character, we note. Among the steerage
passengers is a Syrian girl who much resembles his
cousin Najma. She was sea-sick throughout the voyage,
and when she comes out to breathe of the fresh
air, a few hours before they enter the harbour of New
York, Khalid sees her, and Shakib swears that he saw
a tear in Khalid’s eye as he stood there gazing upon
her. Poor Khalid! For though we are approaching
the last station of the Via Dolorosa, though we are
nearing the enchanted domes of the wonder-working,
wealth-worshipping City, he is inexplicably sad.</p>
<p>And Shakib, directly after swearing that he saw a
tear in his eye, writes the following: “Up to this time
I observed in my friend only the dominating traits of
a hard-headed, hard-hearted boy, stubborn, impetuous,
intractable. But from the time he related to me his
dream, a change in his character was become manifest.
In fact a new phase was being gradually unfolded.
Three things I must emphasise in this connection:
namely, the first dream he dreamt in a foreign land, the
first time he looked pensive and profound, and the first
tear he shed before we entered New York. These are
keys to the secret chamber of one’s soul.”</p>
<p>And now, that the doors, by virtue of our Scribe’s
open-sesames, are thrown open, we enter, <i>bismillah</i>.</p>
<div style="margin: auto; text-align: center; padding-top: 2em; padding-bottom: 1em">

<a id="CHAPTER_IV_ON_THE_WHARF_OF_ENCHANTMENT"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
