<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Last Star</p>
			</hgroup>
<p>Is it not an ethnic phenomenon that a descendant
of the ancient Phœnicians can not understand
the meaning and purport of the Cash Register in
America? Is it not strange that this son of Superstition
and Trade can not find solace in the fact that in
this Pix of Business is the Host of the Demiurgic Dollar?
Indeed, the omnipresence and omnipotence of it
are not without divine significance. For can you not
see that this Cash Register, this Pix of Trade, is
prominently set up on the altar of every institution,
political, moral, social, and religious? Do you not
meet with it everywhere, and foremost in the sanctuaries
of the mind and the soul? In the Societies for
the Diffusion of Knowledge; in the Social Reform
Propagandas; in the Don’t Worry Circles of Metaphysical
Gymnasiums; in Alliances, Philanthropic,
Educational; in the Board of Foreign Missions; in the
Sacrarium of Vaticinatress Eddy; in the Church of
God itself;––is not the Cash Register a divine symbol
of the <i>credo</i>, the faith, or the idea?</p>
<p>“To trade, or not to trade,” Hamlet-Khalid exclaims,
“that is the question: whether ’tis nobler in
the mind to suffer, etc., or to take arms against the
Cash Registers of America, and by opposing end––”

What? Sacrilegious wretch, would you set your face
against the divinity in the Holy Pix of Trade? And
what will you end, and how will You end by it?
An eternal problem, this, of opposing and ending.
But before you set your face in earnest, we would ask
you to consider if the vacancy or chaos which is sure
to follow, be not more pernicious than what you would
end. If you are sure it is not, go ahead, and we give
you Godspeed. If you have the least doubt about it––but
Khalid is incapable now of doubting anything.
And whether he opposes his theory of immanent morality
to the Cash Register, or to Democracy, or to
the ruling powers of Flunkeydom, we hope He will
end well. Such is the penalty of revolt against the
dominating spirit of one’s people and ancestors, that
only once in a generation is it attempted, and scarcely
with much success. In fact, the first who revolts must
perish, the second, too, and the third, and the fourth,
until, in the course of time and by dint of repetition
and resistance, the new species of the race can overcome
the forces of environment and the crushing influence
of conformity. This, we know, is the biological
law, and Khalid must suffer under it. For, as
far as our knowledge extends, he is the first Syrian,
the ancient Lebanon monks excepted, who revolted
against the ruling spirit of his people and the dominant
tendencies of the times, both in his native and his
adopted Countries.</p>
<p>Yes, the <i>êthos</i> of the Syrians (for once we use Khalid’s
philosophic term), like that of the Americans,
is essentially money-seeking. And whether in Beirut

or in New York, even the moralists and reformers,
like the hammals and grocers, will ask themselves, before
they undertake to do anything for you or for their
country, “What will this profit us? How much will
it bring us?” And that is what Khalid once thought
to oppose and end. Alas, oppose he might––and
End He Must. How can an individual, without
the aid of Time and the Unseen Powers, hope to oppose
and end, or even change, this monstrous mass of
things? Yet we must not fail to observe that when
we revolt against a tendency inimical to our law of
being, it is for our own sake, and not the race’s, that
we do so. And we are glad we are able to infer, if
not from the K. L, MS., at least from his Letters,
that Khalid is beginning to realise this truth. Let us
not, therefore, expatiate further upon it.</p>
<p>If the reader will accompany us now to the cellar
to bid our Syrian friends farewell, we promise a few
things of interest. When we first came here some few
years ago in Winter, or to another such underground
dwelling, the water rose ankle-deep over the floor, and
the mould and stench were enough to knock an ox
dead. Now, a scent of ottar of roses welcomes us at
the door and leads us to a platform in the centre,
furnished with a Turkish rug, which Shakib will present
to the landlord as a farewell memento.</p>
<p>And here are our three Syrians making ready for the
voyage. Shakib is intoning some verses of his while
packing; Im-Hanna is cooking the last dish of
<i>mojadderah</i>; and Khalid, with some vague dream in
his eyes, and a vaguer, far-looming hope in his heart,

is sitting on his trunk wondering at the variety of
things Shakib is cramming into his. For our Scribe,
we must not fail to remind the Reader, is contemplating
great things of State, is nourishing a great political
ambition. He will, therefore, bethink him of those in
power at home. Hence these costly presents. Ay, besides
the plated jewellery––the rings, bracelets,
brooches, necklaces, ear-rings, watches, and chains––of
which he is bringing enough to supply the peasants
of three villages, see that beautiful gold-knobbed ebony
stick, which he will present to the vali, and this
precious gold cross with a ruby at the heart for the
Patriarch, and these gold fountain pens for his literary
friends, and that fine Winchester rifle for the chief of
the tribe Anezah. These he packs in the bottom of
his trunk, and with them his precious dilapidated copy
of Al-Mutanabbi, and––what MS. be this? What,
a Book of Verse spawned in the cellar? Indeed, the
very embryo of that printed copy we read in Cairo,
and which Shakib and his friends would have us translate
for the benefit of the English reading public.</p>
<p>For our Scribe is the choragus of the Modern
School of Arabic poetry. And this particular Diwan
of his is a sort of rhymed inventory of all the inventions
and discoveries of modern Science and all the
wonders of America. He has published other Diwans,
in which French morbidity is crowned with laurels
from the Arabian Nights. For this Modern School
has two opposing wings, moved by two opposing
forces, Science being the motive power of the one, and
Byron and De Musset the inspiring geniuses of the

other. We would not be faithful to our Editorial
task and to our Friend, if we did not give here a few
luminant examples of the Diwan in question. We
are, indeed, very sorry, for the sake of our readers, that
space will not allow us to give them a few whole
qasïdahs from it. To those who are so fortunate as
to be able to read and understand the Original, we
point out the Ode to the Phonograph, beginning thus:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p style="margin-left:0.0em; margin-right:0.0em; text-align:left"><span class="leadquote">“</span>O Phonograph, thou wonder of our time,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Thy tongue of wax can sing like me in rhyme.”</span><br/></p>
</div>
<p>And another to the Brooklyn Bridge, of which
these are the opening lines:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p style="margin-left:0.0em; margin-right:0.0em; text-align:left"><span class="leadquote">“</span>O Brooklyn Bridge, how oft upon thy back<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">I tramped, and once I crossed thee in a hack.”</span><br/></p>
</div>
<p>And finally, the great Poem entitled, On the Virtue
and Benefit of Modern Science, of which we remember
these couplets:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p style="margin-left:0.0em; margin-right:0.0em; text-align:left"><span class="leadquote">“</span>Balloons and airships, falling from the skies,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Will be as plenty yet as summer flies.</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 3.5em;">*       *       *       *       *</span><br/>
<span class="leadquote">“</span>Electricity and Steam and Compressed Air<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Will carry us to heaven yet, I swear.”</span><br/></p>
</div>
<p>Here be rhymed truth, at least, which can boast of
not being poetry. Ay, in this MS. which Shakib is
packing along with Al-Mutanabbi in the bottom of his
trunk to evade the Basilisk touch of the Port officials of
Beirut, is packed all the hopes of the Modern School.

Pack on, Shakib; for whether at the Mena House, or
in the hasheesh-dens of Cairo, the Future is drinking
to thee, and dreaming of thee and thy School its opium
dreams. And Khalid, the while, sits impassive on his
trunk, and Im-Hanna is cooking the last dinner of
<i>mojadderah</i>.</p>
<p>Emigration has introduced into Syria somewhat of
the three prominent features of Civilisation: namely, a
little wealth, a few modern ideas, and many strange
diseases. And of these three blessings our two Syrians
together are plentifully endowed. For Shakib is a
type of the emigrant, who returns home prosperous in
every sense of the word. A Book of Verse to lure
Fame, a Letter of Credit to bribe her if necessary, and
a double chin to praise the gods. This is a complete
set of the prosperity, which Khalid knows not. But
he has in his lungs what Shakib the poet can not boast
of; while in his trunk he carries but a little wearing
apparel, his papers, and his blankets. And in his
pocket, he has his ribbed silver cigarette case––the
only object he can not part with––a heart-shaped
locket with a little diamond star on its face––the
only present he is bringing with him home,––and a
third-class passage across the Atlantic. For Khalid
will not sleep in a bunk, even though it be furnished
with eiderdown cushions and tiger skins.</p>
<p>And since he is determined to pass his nights on
deck, it matters little whether he travels first class, or
second or tenth. Shakib, do what he may, cannot prevail
upon him to accept the first-class passage he had
bought in his name. “Let us not quarrel about this,”

says he; “we shall be together on board the same ship,
and that settles the question. Indeed, the worse way
returning home must be ultimately the best. No,
Shakib, it matters not how I travel, if I but get away
quickly from this pandemonium of Civilisation.
Even now, as I sit on this trunk waiting for the hour
of departure, I have a foretaste of the joy of being
away from the insidious cries of hawkers, the tormenting
bells of the rag-man, the incessant howling of children,
the rumbling of carts and wagons, the malicious
whir of cable cars, the grum shrieks of ferry boats, and
the thundering, reverberating, smoking, choking, blinding
abomination of an elevated railway. A musician
might extract some harmony from this chaos of noises,
this jumble of sounds. But I––extract me quickly
from them!”</p>
<p>Ay, quickly please, especially for our sake and the
Reader’s. Now, the dinner is finished, the rug is
folded and presented to our landlord with our salaams,
the trunks are locked and roped, and our Arabs will
silently steal away. And peacefully, too, were it not
that an hour before sailing a capped messenger is come
to deliver a message to Shakib. There is a pleasant
dilative sensation in receiving a message on board a
steamer, especially when the messenger has to seek you
among the Salon passengers. Now, Shakib dilates with
pride as he takes the envelope in his hand; but when
he opens it, and reads on the enclosed card, “Mr.
Isaac Goldheimer wishes you a <i>bon voyage</i>,” he turns
quickly on his heels and goes on deck to walk his wrath
away. For this Mr. Goldheimer is the very landlord

who received the Turkish rug. Reflect on this,
Reader. Father Abraham would have walked with us
to the frontier to betoken his thanks and gratitude.
“But this modern Jew and his miserable card,” exclaims
Shakib in his teeth, as he tears and throws it in
the water,––“who asked him to send it, and who
would have sued him if he didn’t?”</p>
<p>But Shakib, who has lived so long in America and
traded with its people, is yet ignorant of some of the
fine forms and conventions of Civilisation. He
does not know that fashionable folk, or those aping
the dear fashionable folk, have a right to assert their
superiority at his expense.––I do not care to see you,
but I will send a messenger and card to do so for me.
You are not my equal, and I will let you know this,
even at the hour of your departure, and though I have
to hire a messenger to do so.––Is there no taste, no
feeling, no gratitude in this? Don’t you wish, O
Shakib,––but compose yourself. And think not so ill
of your Jewish landlord, whom you wish you could
wrap in that rug and throw overboard. He certainly
meant well. That formula of card and messenger is
so convenient and so cheap. Withal, is he not too
busy, think you, to come up to the dock for the puerile,
prosaic purpose of shaking hands and saying ta-ta?
If you can not consider the matter in this light, try to
forget it. One must not be too visceral at the hour of
departure. Behold, your skyscrapers and your Statue
of Liberty are now receding from view; and your
landlord and his card and messenger will be further
from us every while we think of them, until, thanks to

Time and Space and Steam! they will be too far away
to be remembered.</p>
<p>Here, then, with our young Seer and our Scribe,
we bid New York farewell, and earnestly hope that
we do not have to return to it again, or permit any
of them to do so. In fact, we shall not hereafter consider,
with any ulterior material or spiritual motive,
any more of such disparaging, denigrating matter, in
the two MSS. before us, as has to pass through our reluctant
hands “touchin’ on and appertainin’ to” the
great City of Manhattan and its distinguished
denizens. For our part, we have had enough of this
painful task. And truly, we have never before undergone
such trials in sailing between––but that
Charybdis and Scylla allusion has been done to death.
Indeed, we love America, and in the course of our
present task, which we also love, we had to suffer
Khalid’s shafts to pass through our ken and sometimes
really through our heart. But no more of this. Ay,
we would fain set aside our pen from sheer weariness
of spirit and bid the Reader, too, farewell. Truly, we
would end here this Book of Khalid were it not that
the greater part of the most important material in the
K. L. MS. is yet intact, and the more interesting portion
of Shakib’s History is yet to come. Our readers,
though we do not think they are sorry for having come
out with us so far, are at liberty either to continue
with us, or say good-bye. But for the Editor there is
no choice. What we have begun we must end, unmindful
of the influence, good or ill, of the Zodiacal
Signs under which we work.
</p>
<p>“Our Phœnician ancestors,” says Khalid, “never
left anything they undertook unfinished. Consider
what they accomplished in their days, and the degree
of culture they attained. The most beautiful fabrications
in metals and precious stones were prepared in
Syria. Here, too, the most important discoveries were
made: namely, those of glass and purple. As for me,
I can not understand what the Murex trunculus is;
and I am not certain if scholars and archæologists, or
even mariners and fishermen, will ever find a fossil
of that particular species. But murex or no murex,
Purple was discovered by my ancestors. Hence the
purple passion, that is to say the energy and intensity
which coloured everything they did, everything they
felt and believed. For whether in bemoaning Tammuz,
or in making tear-bottles, or in trading with the
Gauls and Britons, the Phœnicians were the same
superstitious, honest, passionate, energetic people.
And do not forget, you who are now enjoying the
privilege of setting down your thoughts in words, that
on these shores of Syria written language received its
first development.</p>
<p>“It is also said that they discovered and first navigated
the Atlantic Ocean, my Phœnicians; that they
worked gold mines in the distant isle of Thasos and
opened silver mines in the South and Southwest of
Spain. In Africa, we know, they founded the colonies
of Utica and Carthage. But we are told they went
farther than this. And according to some historians,
they rounded the Cape, they circumnavigated Africa.
And according to recent discoveries made by an

American archæologist, they must have discovered
America too! For in the ruins of the Aztecs of
Mexico there are traces of a Phœnician language and
religion. This, about the discovery of America, however,
I can not verify with anything from Sanchuniathon.
But might they not have made this discovery
after the said Sanchuniathon had given up the ghost?
And if they did, what can We, their worthless descendants
do for them now? Ah, if we but knew the
name of their Columbus! No, it is not practical to
build a monument to a whole race of people. And
yet, they deserve more than this from us, their descendants.</p>
<p>“These dealers in tin and amber, these manufacturers
of glass and purple, these developers of a written
language, first gave the impetus to man’s activity and
courage and intelligence. And this activity of the industry
and will is not dead in man. It may be dead
in us Syrians, but not in the Americans. In their
strenuous spirit it rises uppermost. After all, I must
love the Americans, for they are my Phœnician ancestors
incarnate. Ay, there is in the nature of things a
mysterious recurrence which makes for a continuous,
everlasting modernity. And I believe that the spirit
which moved those brave sea-daring navigators of yore,
is still working lustily, bravely, but alas, not joyously––bitterly,
rather, selfishly, greedily––behind the
steam engine, the electric motor, the plough, and in the
clinic and the studio as in the Stock Exchange. That
spirit in its real essence, however, is as young, as puissant
to-day as it was when the native of Byblus first

struck out to explore the seas, to circumnavigate
Africa, to discover even America!”</p>
<p>And what in the end might Khalid discover for us
or for himself, at least, in his explorations of the
Spirit-World? What Colony of the chosen sons of
the young and puissant Spirit, on some distant isle beyond
the seven seas, might he found? To what far,
silent, undulating shore, where “a written language is
the instrument only of the lofty expressions and aspirations
of the soul” might he not bring us? What
Cape of Truth in the great Sea of Mystery might we
not be able to circumnavigate, if only this were possible
of the language of man?</p>
<p>“Not with glass,” he exclaims, “not with tear-bottles,
not with purple, not with a written language,
am I now concerned, but rather with what those in
Purple and those who make this written language their
capital, can bring within our reach of the treasures
of the good, the true, and the beautiful. I would fain
find a land where the soul of man, and the heart of
man, and the mind of man, are as the glass of my ancestors’
tear-bottles in their enduring quality and
beauty. My ancestors’ tear-bottles, and though buried
in the earth ten thousand years, lose not a grain of
their original purity and transparency, of their soft and
iridescent colouring. But where is the natural colour
and beauty of these human souls, buried in bunks under
hatches? Or of those moving in high-lacquered salons
above?...</p>
<p>“O my Brothers of the clean and unclean species,
of the scented and smelling kind, of the have and have-not

classes, there is but one star in this vague dusky
sky above us, for you as for myself. And that star
is either the last in the eternal darkness, or the first
in the rising dawn. It is either the first or the last
star of night. And who shall say which it is? Not
the Church, surely, nor the State; not Science, nor
Sociology, nor Philosophy, nor Religion. But the human
will shall influence that star and make it yield
its secret and its fire. Each of you, O my Brothers,
can make it light his own hut, warm his own heart,
guide his own soul. Never before in the history of
man did it seem as necessary as it does now that each
individual should think for himself, will for himself,
and aspire incessantly for the realisation of his ideals
and dreams. Yes, we are to-day at a terrible and
glorious turning point, and it depends upon us whether
that one star in the vague and dusky sky of modern
life, shall be the harbinger of Jannat or Juhannam.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
