<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Disentanglement of the Me</p>
			</hgroup>
<p>“Why this exaggerated sense of thine importance,”
Khalid asks himself in the K. L. MS., “when
a little ptomaine in thy cheese can poison the source
of thy lofty contemplations? Why this inflated conception
of thy Me, when an infusion of poppy seeds
might lull it to sleep, even to stupefaction? What
avails thy logic when a little of the Mandragora can
melt the material universe into golden, unfolding infinities
of dreams? Why take thyself so seriously
when a leaf of henbane, taken by mistake in thy salad,
can destroy thee? But the soul is not dependent on
health or disease. The soul is the source of both
health and disease. And life, therefore, is either a
healthy or a diseased state of the soul.</p>
<p>“One day, when I was rolling these questions in my
mind, and working on a reed basket to present to my
friend the Hermit as a farewell memento, his serving-monk
brings me some dried figs in a blue kerchief and
says, ‘My Master greets thee and prays thee come to
him.’ I do so the following morning, bringing with
me the finished basket, and as I enter the Hermitage
court, I find him repairing a stone wall in the vineyard.
As he sees me, he hastens to put on his cloak that I
might not remark the sack-cloth he wore, and with a

pious smile of assurance and thankfulness, welcomes
and embraces me, as is his wont. We sit down in the
corridor before the chapel door. The odorous vapor
of what was still burning in the censer within hung
above us. The holy atmosphere mantled the dread
silence of the place. And the slow, insinuating smell
of incense, like the fumes of gunga, weighed heavy on
my eyelids and seemed to brush from my memory the
cobwebs of time. A drowsiness possessed me; I felt
like one awaking from a dream. I asked for the water
jug, which the Hermit hastened to bring. And looking
through the door of the chapel, I saw on the altar a
burning cresset flickering like the planet Mercury on
a December morning. How often did I light such a
cresset when a boy, I mused. Yes, I was an acolyte
once. I swang the censer and drank deep of the incense
fumes as I chanted in Syriac the service. And I
remember when I made a mistake one day in reading
the Epistle of Paul, the priest, who was of an irascible
humour, took me by the ear and made me spell the
words I could not pronounce. And the boys in the congregation
tittered gleefully. In my mortification was
honey for them. Such was my pride, nevertheless,
such the joy I felt, when, of all the boys that gathered
round the lectern at vespers, I was called upon to read
in the <i>sinksar</i> (hagiography) the Life of the Saint of
the day.</p>
<p>“I knew then that to steal, for instance, is a sin;
and yet, I emptied the box of wafers every morning
after mass and shared them with the very boys who
laughed at my mistakes. One day, in the purest intention,

I offered one of these wafers to my donkey and
he would not eat it. I felt insulted, and never after
did I pilfer a wafer. Now, as I muse on these sallies
of boyish waywardness I am impressed with the idea
that the certainty and daring of Ignorance, or might I
say Innocence, are great. Indeed, to the pure everything
is pure. But strange to relate that as I sat in
the corridor of the Hermitage and saw the light flickering
on the altar, I hankered for a wafer, and was
tempted to go into the chapel and filch one. What
prevented me? Alas, knowledge makes sceptics and
cowards of us all. And the pursuit of knowledge, according
to my Hermit, nay, the noblest pursuit, even
the serving of God, ceases to be a virtue the moment
we begin to enjoy it.</p>
<p>“‘It is necessary to conquer, not only our instincts,’
he continued, ‘but our intellectual and our
spiritual passions as well. To force our will in the
obedience of a higher will, to leave behind all our
mundane desires in the pursuit of the one great desire,
herein lies the essence of true virtue. St. Anthony
would snatch his hours of devotion from the Devil.
Even prayer to him was a struggle, an effort not to
feel the joy of it. Yes, we must always disobey our
impulses, and resist the tyranny of our desires. When
I have a strong desire to pray, I go out into the vineyard
and work. When I begin to enjoy my work in
the vineyard, I cease to do it well. Therefore, I take
up my breviary. Do that which you must not do,
when you are suffering, and you will not want to do
it again, when you are happy. The other day, one

who visited the Hermitage, spoke to me of you, O
Khalid. He said you were what is called an anarchist.
And after explaining to me what is meant by this––I
never heard of such a religion before––I discovered
to my surprise that I, too, am an anarchist. But there
is this difference between us: I obey only God and
the authority of God, and you obey your instincts and
what is called the authority of reason. Yours, O Khalid,
is a narrow conception of anarchy. In truth, you
should try to be an anarchist like me: subordinate your
personality, your will and mind and soul, to a higher
will and intelligence, and resist with all your power
everything else. Why do you not come to the Hermitage
for a few days and make me your confessor?’</p>
<p>“‘I do not confess in private, and I can not sleep
within doors.’</p>
<p>“‘You do not have to do so; the booth under the almond
tree is at your disposal. Come for a spiritual
exercise of one week only.’</p>
<p>“‘I have been going through such an exercise for a
year, and soon I shall leave my cloister in the pines.’</p>
<p>“‘What say you? You are leaving our neighbourhood?
No, no; remain here, O Khalid. Come, live
with me in the Hermitage. Come back to Mother
Church; return not to the wicked world. O Khalid,
we must inherit the Kingdom of Allah, and we can not
do so by being anarchist like the prowlers of the forest.
Meditate on the insignificance and evanescence
of human life.’</p>
<p>“‘But it lies within us, O my Brother, to make it
significant and eternal.’
</p>
<p>“‘Yes, truly, in the bosom of Mother Church.
Come back to your Mother––come to the Hermitage––let
us pass this life together.’</p>
<p>“‘And what will you do, if in the end you discover
that I am in the right?’</p>
<p>“Here he paused a moment, and, casting on me a
benignant glance, makes this reply: ‘Then, I will
rejoice, rejoice,’ he gasped; ‘for we shall both be in the
right. You will become an anarchist like me and not
against the wretched authorities of the world, but
against your real enemies, Instinct and Reason.’</p>
<p>“And thus, now and then, he would salt his argument
with a pinch of casuistic wit. Once he was hard
set, and, to escape the alternatives of the situation, he
condescended to tell me the story of his first and only
love.</p>
<p>“‘In my youth,’ said the Hermit, ‘I was a shoemaker,
and not a little fastidious as a craftsman. In
fact, I am, and always have been, an extremist, a purist.
I can not tolerate the cobblings of life. Either
do your work skilfully, devotedly, earnestly, or do it
not. So, as a shoemaker, I succeeded very well.
Truth to tell, my work was as good, as neat, as elegant
as that of the best craftsman in Beirut. And you
know, Beirut is noted for its shoemakers. Yes, I was
successful as any of them, and I counted among my
customers the bishop of the diocese himself. One day,
forgive me, Allah! a young girl, the daughter of a
peasant neighbour, comes into the shop to order a pair
of shoes. In taking the measure of her foot––but I
must not linger on these details. A shoemaker can

not fail to notice the shape of his customer’s foot.
Well, I measured, too, her ankle––ah, forgive me,
Allah!</p>
<p>“‘In brief, when the shoes were finished––I spent
a whole day in the finishing touches––I made her a
present of them. And she, in recognition of my favor,
made a plush tobacco bag, on which my name was
worked in gold threads, and sent it to me, wrapped in
a silk handkerchief, with her brother. Now, that is
the opening chapter. I will abruptly come to the last,
skipping the intermediate parts, for they are too silly,
all of them. I will only say that I was as earnest, as
sincere, as devoted in this affair of love as I was in
my craft. Of a truth, I was mad about both.</p>
<p>“‘Now the closing chapter. One day I went to see
her––we were engaged––and found she had gone to
the spring for water. I follow her there and find her
talking to a young man, a shoemaker like myself. No,
he was but a cobbler. On the following day, going
again to see her, I find this cobbler there. I remonstrate
with her, but in vain. And what is worse, she
had sent to him the shoes I made, to be repaired. He
was patching my own work! I swallowed my ire and
went back to my shop. A week later, to be brief, I
went there again, and what I beheld made my body
shiver. She, the wench. Forgive me, Allah! had her
hands around his neck and her lips––yes, her lying
lips, on his cheek! No, no; even then I did not utter
a word. I could but cry in the depth of my heart.
How can woman be so faithless, so treacherous––in
my heart I cried.
</p>
<p>“‘It was a terrible shock; and from it I lay in bed
for days with chills and fever. Now, when I recovered,
I was determined on pursuing a new course of
life. No longer would I measure women’s feet. I
sold my stock, closed my shop, and entered the monastery.
I heard afterwards that she married that young
cobbler; emigrated with him to America; deserted him
there; returned to her native village; married again,
and fled with her second husband to South Africa.
Allah be praised! even He appreciates the difference
between a shoemaker and a cobbler; and the bad woman
He gives to the bad craftsman. That is why I say,
Never be a cobbler, whatever you do.</p>
<p>“‘But in the monastery––draw near, I will speak
freely––in the monastery, too, there are cobblers and
shoemakers. There, too, is much ungodliness, much
treachery, much cobbling. Ah me, I must not speak
thus. Forgive me, Allah! But I promised to tell
you the whole story. Therefore, I will speak freely.
After passing some years in the monastery, years of
probation and grief they were, I fell sick with a virulent
fever. The abbot, seeing that there was little
chance of my recovery, would not send for the physician.
And so, I languished for weeks, suffering from
thirst and burning pains and hunger. I raved and
chattered in my delirium. I betrayed myself, too,
they told me. The monks my brothers, even during
my suffering, made a scandal of the love affair I related.
They said that I exposed my wounds and my
broken heart before the Virgin, that I sinned in thought
and word on my death-bed. Allah forgive them. It

may be, however; for I know not what I said and what
I did. But when I recovered, I was determined not to
remain in the monastery, and not to return to the
world. The wicked world, I disentangled myself absolutely
from its poisoned meshes. I came to the Hermitage,
to this place. And never, since I made my
second remove until now, have I known disease, or
sorrow, nor treachery, which is worse than both. Allah
be praised! One’s people, one’s brothers, one’s
lovers and friends, are a hindrance and botheration.
We are nothing, nothing: God is everything. God is
the only reality. And in God alone is my refuge.
That is my story in brief. If I did not like you, I
would not have told it, and so freely. Meditate upon
it, and on the insignificance and evanescence of human
life. The world is a snare, and a bad snare, at that.
For it can not hold us long enough in it to learn to
like it. It is a cobbler’s snare. The world is full of
cobblers, O Khalid. Come away from it; be an ideal
craftsman––be an extremist––be a purist––come
live with me. Let us join our souls in devotion, and
our hearts in love. Come, let us till and cultivate
this vineyard together.’</p>
<p>“And taking me by the hand, he shows me a cell
furnished with a hair-mat, a <i>masnad</i> (leaning pillow),
and a chair. ‘This cell,’ says he, ‘was occupied by
the Bishop when he came here for a spiritual exercise
of three weeks. It shall be yours if you come; it’s the
best cell in the Hermitage. Now, let us visit the
chapel.’ I go in with him, and as we are coming out,
I ask him child-like for a wafer. He brings the box

straightway, begs me to take as much as I desire, and
placing his hand on my shoulder, encircles me with
one of his benignant glances, saying, ‘Allah illumine
thy heart, O Khalid.’ ‘Allah hear thy prayer,’ I reply.
And we part in tears.”</p>
<p>Here Khalid bursts in ecstasy about the higher spiritual
kingdom, and chops a little logic about the I and
the not-I, the Reality and the non-Reality.––“God,”
says the Hermit. “Thought,” says the
Idealist, “that is the only Reality.” And what is
Thought, and what is God, and what is Matter, and
what is Spirit? They are the mysterious vessels of
Life, which are always being filled by Love and emptied
by Logic. “The external world,” says the Materialist––“Does
not exist,” says the Idealist. “’Tis
immaterial if it does or not,” says the Hermit. And
what if the three are wrong? The Universe, knowable
and unknowable, will it be affected a whit by it?
If the German Professor’s Chair of Logic and Philosophy
were set up in the Hermitage, would anything be
gained or lost? Let the <i>I</i> deny the stars, and they
will nevertheless roll in silence above it. Let the not-I
crush this I, this “thinking reed,” and the higher universal
I, rising above the stars and flooding the sidereal
heavens with light, will warm, remold, and regenerate
the world.</p>
<p>“I can conceive of a power,” writes Khalid in that
vexing Manuscript, “which can create a beautiful
parti-colored sun-flower of the shattered fragments of
Idealism, Materialism, and my Hermit’s theology.
Why not, if in the New World––” And here, of a

sudden, to surprise and bewilder us, he drags in Mrs.
Eddy and the Prophet Dowie yoked under the yoke of
Whitman. He marks the <i>Key to Scripture</i> with blades
from <i>Leaves of Grass</i>, and such fuel as he gathers from
both, he lights with an ember borrowed from the chariot
to Elijah. And thus, for ten whole pages, beating
continually, now in the dark of Metaphysics, now in
the dusk of Science; losing himself in the tangled
bushes of English Materialism, and German Mysticism,
and Arabic Sufism; calling now to Berkeley, now
to Hackel; meeting with Spencer here, with Al-Gazzaly
there; and endeavoring to extricate himself in the
end with some such efforts as “the Natural being
Negativity, the Spiritual must be the opposite of that,
and both united in God form the Absolute,” etc., etc.
But we shall not give ourselves further pain in laying
before the English reader the like heavy and unwieldy
lumber. Whoever relishes such stuff, and can
digest it, need not apply to Khalid; for, in this case,
he is but a poor third-hand caterer. Better go to the
Manufacturers direct; they are within reach of every
one in this Age of Machinery and Popular Editions.
But there are passages here, of which Khalid can say,
‘The Mortar at least is mine.’ And in this Mortar
he mixes and titrates with his Neighbour’s Pestle some
of his fantasy and insight. Of these we offer a sample:</p>
<p>“I say with psychologists, as the organism, so is the
personality. The revelation of the Me is perfect in
proportion to the sound state of the Medium. But
according to the Arabic proverb, the jar oozes of its

contents. If these be of a putridinous mixture, therefore,
no matter how sound the jar, the ooze is not going
to smell of ambergris and musk. So, it all depends
on the contents with which the Potter fills his
jugs and pipkins, I assure you. And if the contents
are good and the jar is sound, we get such excellence
of soul as is rare among mortals. If the contents are
excellent and the jar is cracked, the objective influence
will then predominate, and putrescence, soon or
late, will set in. Now, the Me in the majority of
mankind comes to this world in a cracked pipkin, and
it oozes out entirely as soon as it liquifies in youth.
The pipkin, therefore, goes through life empty and
cracked, ever sounding flat and false. While in
others the Me is enclosed in a sealed straw-covered
flask and can only be awakened by either evaporation
or decapitation, in other words, by a spiritual revolution.
And in the very few among mortals, it emerges
out of the iron calyx of a flower of red-hot steel, or
flows from the transparent, odoriferous bosom of a
rose of light. In the first we have a Cæsar, an Alexander,
a Napoleon; in the second, a Buddha, a Socrates,
a Christ.</p>
<p>“But consider that Science, in the course of psychological
analysis, speaks of Christ, Napoleon, and
Shakespeare, as patients. Such exalted states of the
soul, such activity of the mind, such exuberance of
spiritual strength, are but the results of the transformation
of the Me in the subject, we are told, and
this transformation has its roots in the organism.
But why, I ask, should there be such a gulf between

individuals, such a difference in their Mes, when a difference
in the organism is a trifle in comparison?
How account for the ebb and flow in the souls, or let
us say, in the expression of the individualities, of Mohammad
the Prophet, for instance, and Mohammad
the camel-herd? And why is it in psychological
states that are similar, the consciousness of the one is
like a mountain peak, so to speak, and that of the
other like a cave?</p>
<p>“A soldier is severely wounded in battle and a
change takes place in his nervous organism, by reason
of which he loses his organic consciousness; or, to speak
in the phraseology of the psychologist, he loses the
sense of his own body, of his physical personality.
The cause of this change is probably the wound received;
but the nature of the change can be explained
only by hypotheses, which are become matters of
choice and taste––and sometimes of personal interest
among scientists. Now, when the question is resolved
by hypothesis, is not even a layman free to
offer one? If I say the Glass is shattered and the
Me within is sadly reflected, or in a more tragic instance
the light of the Me runs out, would I not be
offering thee a solution as dear and tenable as that
of the professor of psychology?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
