<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Dowry of Democracy</p>
			</hgroup>
<p>Old Arabic books, printed in Bulaq, generally
have a broad margin wherein a separate work,
independent of the text, adds gloom to the page. We
have before us one of these tomes in which the text
treats of the ethics of life and religion, and the margins
are darkened with certain adventures which
Shahrazad might have added to her famous Nights.
The similarity between Khalid’s life in its present
stage and some such book, is evident. Nay, he has
been so assiduous in writing the marginal Work, that
ever since he set fire to his peddling-box, we have had
little in the Text worth transcribing. Nothing, in
fact; for many pages back are as blank as the evil genius
of Bohemia could wish them. And how could one
with that mara upon him, write of the ethics of life
and religion?</p>
<p>Al-Hamazani used to say that in Jorajan the man
from Khorasan must open thrice his purse: first, to pay
for the rent; second, for the food; and third, for his
coffin. And so, in Khalid’s case, at least, is Bohemia.
For though the purse be not his own, he was paying
dear, and even in advance, in what is dearer than
gold, for his experience. “O, that the Devil did
not take such interest in the marginal work of our

life! Why should we write it then, and for whom?
And how will it fare with us when, chapfallen in the
end and mortified, we stand before the great Task-Master
like delinquent school boys with a blank text
in our hands?” (Thus Shakib, who has caught the
moralising evil from his Master.) And that we must
stand, and fall, for thus standing, he is quite certain.
At least, Khalid is. For he would not return to the
Text to make up for the blank pages therein, if he were
not.</p>
<p>“When he returned from his last sojourn in Bohemia,”
writes our Scribe, “Khalid was pitiful to behold.
Even Sindbad, had he seen him, would have
been struck with wonder. The tears rushed to my
eyes when we embraced; for instead of Khalid I had in
my arms a phantom. And I could not but repeat the
lines of Al-Mutanabbi,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p style="margin-left:0.0em; margin-right:0.0em; text-align:left"><span class="leadquote">“</span>So phantom-like I am, and though so near,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">If I spoke not, thou wouldst not know I’m here.”</span><br/></p>
</div>
<p>““No more voyages, I trust, O thou Sindbad.” And
he replied, “Yes, one more; but to our dear native land
this time.” In fact, I, too, was beginning to suffer
from nostalgia, and was much desirous of returning
home.” But Shakib is in such a business tangle that
he could not extricate himself in a day. So, they
tarry another year in New York, the one meanwhile
unravelling his affairs, settling with his creditors and
collecting what few debts he had, the other brooding
over the few blank pages in his Text.
</p>
<p>One day he receives a letter from a fellow traveller,
a distinguished citizen of Tammany Land, whom he
had met and befriended in Bohemia, relating to an
enterprise of great pith and moment. It was election
time, we learn, and the high post of political canvasser
of the Syrian District was offered to Khalid for
a consideration of––but the letter which Shakib happily
preserved, we give in full.</p>
<blockquote><div>
<p>“Dear Khalid:</p>
<p>“I have succeeded in getting Mr. O’Donohue to appoint
you a canvasser of the Syrian District. You must stir yourself,
therefore, and try to do some good work, among the
Syrian voters, for Democracy’s Candidate this campaign.
Here is a chance which, with a little hustling on your part,
will materialise. And I see no reason why you should not
try to cash your influence among your people. This is no
mean position, mind you. And if you will come up to the
Wigwam to-morrow, I’ll give you a few suggestions on the
business of manipulating votes.</p>
<p style="margin-left:0.0em; margin-right:5.0em; text-align:right"><span style="margin-right: 3.90625em;">“Yours truly,</span><br/>
“<span style="font-variant:small-caps">Patrick Hoolihan</span>.”<br/></p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>And the said Mr. Hoolihan, the letter shows, is
Secretary to Mr. O’Donohue, who is first henchman to
the Boss. Such a letter, if luckily misunderstood, will
fire for a while the youthful imagination. No; not
his Shamrag Majesty’s Tammany Agent to Syria,
this Canvassership, you poor phantom-like zany! A
high post, indeed, you fond and pitiful dreamer, on
which you must hang the higher aspirations of your
soul, together with your theory of immanent morality.
You would not know this at first. You would still
kiss the official notification of Mr. Hoolihan, and hug
it fondly to your breast. Very well. At last––and

the gods will not damn thee for musing––you will
stand in the band-wagon before the corner groggery
and be the object of the admiration of your fellow citizens––perhaps
of missiles, too. Very well, Khalid;
but you must shear that noddle of thine, and straightway,
for the poets are potted in Tammany Land. We
say this for your sake.</p>
<p>The orator-dream of youth, ye gods, shall it be
realised in this heaven of a dray-cart with its kerosene
torch and its drum, smelling and sounding rather
of Juhannam? Surely, from the Table of Bohemia
to the Stump in Tammany Land, is a far cry. But believe
us, O Khalid, you will wish you were again in
the gardens of Proserpine, when the silence and darkness
extinguish the torch and the drum and the echoes
of the shouting crowds. The headaches are certain
to follow this inebriation. You did not believe
Shakib; you would not be admonished; you would go
to the Wigwam for your portfolio. “<i>High post</i>,”
“<i>political canvasser</i>,” “<i>manipulation of votes</i>,” you
will know the exact meaning of these esoteric terms,
when, alas, you meet Mr. Hoolihan. For you must
know that not every one you meet in Bohemia is not a
Philistine. Indeed, many helots are there, who come
from Philistia to spy out the Land.</p>
<p>We read in the <i>Histoire Intime</i> of Shakib that
Khalid did become a Tammany citizen, that is to say,
a Tammany dray-horse; that he was much esteemed
by the Honourable Henchmen, and once in the Wigwam
he was particularly noticed by his Shamrag
Majesty Boss O’Graft; that he was Tammany’s Agent

to the Editors of the Syrian newspapers of New York,
whom he enrolled in the service of the Noble Cause
for a consideration which no eloquence or shrewdness
could reduce to a minimum; that he also took to the
stump and dispensed to his fellow citizens, with rhetorical
gestures at least, of the cut-and-dried logic which
the Committee of Buncombe on such occasions
furnishes its squad of talented spouters; and that––the
most important this––he was subject in the end
to the ignominy of waiting in the lobby with tuft-hunters
and political stock-jobbers, until it pleased the
Committee of Buncombe and the Honourable Treasurer
thereof to give him––a card of dismissal!</p>
<p>But what virtue is there in waiting, our cynical
friend would ask. Why not go home and sleep?
Because, O cynical friend, the Wigwam now is
Khalid’s home. For was he not, in creaking boots
and a slouch hat, ceremoniously married to Democracy?
Ay, and after spending their honeymoon
on the Stump and living another month or two
with his troll among her People, he returns to his
cellar to brood, not over the blank pages in his Text,
nor over the disastrous results of the Campaign, but
on the weightier matter of divorce. For although
Politics and Romance, in the History of Human Intrigue,
have often known and enjoyed the same yoke,
with Khalid they refused to pull at the plough. They
were not sensible even to the goad. Either the yoke
in his case was too loose, or the new yoke-fellow too
thick-skinned and stubborn.</p>
<p>Moreover, the promise of a handsome dowry, made

by the Shamrag Father-in-Law or his Brokers materialised
only in the rotten eggs and tomatoes with which
the Orator was cordially received on his honeymoon
trip. Such a marriage, O Mohammad, and such a
honeymoon, and such a dowry!––is not this enough
to shake the very sides of the Kaaba with laughter?
And yet, in the Wigwam this not uncommon affair
was indifferently considered; for the good and honourable
Tammanyites marry off their Daughters every
day to foreigners and natives alike, and with like extraordinary
picturesque results.</p>
<p>Were it not wiser, therefore, O Khalid, had you
consulted your friend the Dictionary before you saw
exact meaning of canvass and manipulation, before
you put on your squeaking boots and slouch hat and
gave your hand and heart to Tammany’s Daughter
and her Father-in-Law O’Graft? But the Dictionary,
too, often falls short of human experience; and
even Mr. O’Donohue could at best but hint at the
meaning of the esoteric terms of Tammany’s political
creed. These you must define for yourself as you go
along; and change and revise your definitions as you
rise or descend in the Sacred Order. For canvass here
might mean eloquence; there it might mean shrewdness;
lower down, intimidation and coercion; and further
depthward, human sloth and misery. It is but a
common deal in horses. Ay, in Tammany Land it is
essentially a trade honestly conducted on the known
principle of supply and demand. These truths you
had to discover for yourself, you say; for neither the
Dictionary, nor your friend and fellow traveller in

Bohemia, Mr. Hoolihan, could stretch their knowledge
or their conscience to such a compass. And
you are not sorry to have made such a discovery?
Can you think of the Dowry and say that? We are,
indeed, sorry for you. And we would fain insert in
letter D of the Dictionary a new definition: namely,
Dowry, n. (Tammany Land Slang). The odoriferous
missiles, such as eggs and tomatoes, which are
showered on an Orator-Groom by the people.</p>
<p>But see what big profits Khalid draws from these
small shares in the Reality Stock Company. You remember,
good Reader, how he was kicked away from
the door of the Temple of Atheism. The stogies of
that inspired Doorkeeper were divine, according to his
way of viewing things, for they were at that particular
moment God’s own boots. Ay, it was God, he
often repeats, who kicked him away from the Temple
of his enemies. And now, he finds the Dowry of
Democracy, with all its wonderful revelations, as
profitable in its results, as divine in its purpose. And
in proof of this, we give here a copy of his letter to
Boss O’Graft, written in that downright manner of
his contemporaries, the English original of which we
find in the <i>Histoire Intime</i>.</p>
<blockquote><div>
<p style="margin-left:0.0em; margin-right:0.0em; text-align:center">“From Khalid to Boss O’Graft.<br/></p>
<p>“Right <i>Dis</i>honourable Boss:</p>
<p>“I have just received a check from your Treasurer, which
by no right whatever is due me, having been paid for my
services by Him who knows better than you and your Treasurer
what I deserve. The voice of the people, and their
eggs and tomatoes, too, are, indeed, God’s. And you should
know this, you who dare to remunerate me in what is not

half as clean as those missiles. I return not your insult of a
check, however; but I have tried to do your state some service
in purchasing the few boxes of soap which I am now
dispatching to the Wigwam. You need more, I know, you
and your Honourable Henchmen or Hashmen. And instead
of canvassing and orating for Democracy’s illustrious Candidate
and the Noble Cause, <i>mashallah!</i> one ought to do
a little canvassing for Honesty and Truth among Democracy’s
leaders, tuft-hunters, political stock-jobbers, and such
like. O, for a higher stump, my Boss, to preach to those
who are supporting and degrading the stumps and the stump-orators
of the Republic!”</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>And is it come to this, you poor phantom-like
dreamer? Think you a Tammany Boss is like your
atheists and attorneys and women of the studio, at
whom you could vent your ire without let or hindrance?
These harmless humans have no constables
at their command. But his Shamrag Majesty––O
wretched Khalid, must we bring one of his myrmidons
to your cellar to prove to you that, even in this
Tammany Land, you can not with immunity give free
and honest expression to your thoughts? Now, were
you not summoned to the Shamrag’s presence to
answer for the crime of <i>lèse-majesté</i>? And were you
not, for your audacity, left to brood ten days and
nights in gaol? And what tedium we have in
Shakib’s History about the charge on which he was
arrested. It is unconscionable that Khalid should
misappropriate Party funds. Indeed, he never
even touched or saw any of it, excepting, of course, that
check which he returned. But the Boss was still in
power. And what could Shakib do to exonerate his
friend? He did much, and he tells as much about it.

With check-boot in his pocket, he makes his way
through aldermen, placemen, henchmen, and other questionable
political species of humanity, up to the Seat of
Justice––but such detail, though of the veracity of the
writer nothing doubting, we gladly set aside, since we
believe with Khalid that his ten days in gaol were akin
to the Boots and the Dowry in their motive and
effect.</p>
<p>But our Scribe, though never remiss when Khalid
is in a pickle, finds much amiss in Khalid’s thoughts
and sentiments. And as a further illustration of the
limpid shallows of the one and the often opaque
depths of the other, we give space to the following:</p>
<p>“When Khalid was ordered to appear before the
Boss,” writes Shakib, “such curiosity and anxiety as I
felt at that time made me accompany him. For I was
anxious about Khalid, and curious to see this great
Leader of men. We set out, therefore, together, I
musing on an incident in Baalbek when we went out
to meet the Pasha of the Lebanons and a droll old
peasant, having seen him for the first time, cried out,
‘I thought the Pasha to be a Pasha, but he’s but a
man.’ And I am sorry, after having seen the Boss,
I can not say as much for him.”</p>
<p>Here follows a little philosophising, unbecoming of
our Scribe, on men and names and how they act and
react upon each other. Also, a page about his misgivings
and the effort he made to persuade Khalid not
to appear before the Boss. But skipping over these,
“we reach the Tammany Wigwam and are conducted
by a thick-set, heavy-jowled, heavy-booted citizen

through the long corridor into a little square room
occupied by a little square-faced clerk. Here we wait
a half hour and more, during which the young
gentleman, with his bell before him and his orders to
minor clerks who come and go, poses as somebody of
some importance. We are then asked to follow him
from one room into another, until we reach the one
adjoining the private office of the Boss. A knock or
two are executed on the door of Greatness with a
nauseous sense of awe, and ‘Come in,’ Greatness within
huskily replies. The square-faced clerk enters,
shuts the door after him, returns in a trice, and conducts
us into the awful Presence. Ye gods of Baalbek,
the like of this I never saw before. Here is a
room sumptuously furnished with sofas and fauteuils,
and rugs from Ispahan. On the walls are pictures
of Washington, Jefferson, and the great Boss Tweed;
and right under the last named, behind that preciously
carved mahogany desk, in that soft rolling mahogany
chair, is the squat figure of the big Boss. On the
desk before him, besides a plethora of documents, lay
many things pell-mell, among which I noticed a box of
cigars, the Criminal Code, and, most prominent of all,
the Boss’ feet, raised there either to bid us welcome,
or to remind us of his power. And the rich Ispahan
rug, the cuspidor being small and overfull, receives
the richly coloured matter which he spurts forth every
time he takes the cigar out of his mouth. O, the vulgarity,
the bestiality of it! Think of those poor patient
Persian weavers who weave the tissues of their
hearts into such beautiful work, and of this proud and

paltry Boss, whose office should have been furnished
with straw. Yes, with straw; and the souls of those
poor artist-weavers will sleep in peace. O, the ignominy
of having such precious pieces of workmanship
under the feet and spittle of such vulgar specimens of
humanity. But if the Boss had purchased these rugs
himself, with money earned by his own brow-sweat,
I am sure he would appreciate them better. He would
then know, if not their intrinsic worth, at least their
market value. Yes, and they were presented to him
by some one <i>needing, I suppose, police connivance
and protection</i>. The first half of this statement I
had from the Boss himself; the second, I base on
Khalid’s knowingness and suspicion. Be this, however,
as it may.</p>
<p>“When we entered this sumptuously furnished office,
the squat figure in the chair under the picture of
Boss Tweed, remained as immobile as a fixture and
did not as much as reply to our <i>salaam</i>. But he
pointed disdainfully to seats in the corner of the room,
saying, ‘Sit down there,’ in a manner quite in keeping
with his stogies raised on the desk directly in our face.
Such freedom, nay, such bestiality, I could never tolerate.
Indeed, I prefer the suavity and palaver of
Turkish officials, no matter how crafty and corrupt, to
the puffing, spitting manners of these come-up-from-the-shamble
men. But Khalid could sit there as immobile
as the Boss himself, and he did so, billah! For
he was thinking all the while, as he told me when we
came out, not of such matters as grate on the susceptibilities
of a poet, but on the one sole idea of how such

a bad titman could lead by the nose so many good
people.”</p>
<p>Shakib then proceeds to give us a verbatim report of
the interview. It begins with the Boss’ question,
“What do you mean by writing such a letter?” and
ends with this other, “What do you mean by immanent
morality?” The reader, given the head and tail of the
matter, can supply the missing parts. Or, given its
two bases, he can construct this triangle of Politics,
Ethics, and the Constable, with Khalid’s letter,
offended Majesty, and a prison cell, as its three turning
points. We extract from the report, however, the
concluding advice of the Boss. For when he asked
Khalid again what he meant by immanent morality, he
continued in a crescendo of indignation: “You mean
the morality of hayseeds, and priests, and philosophical
fools? That sort of morality will not as much as secure
a vote during the campaign, nor even help to
keep the lowest clerk in office. That sort of morality
is good for your mountain peasants or other barbarous
tribes. But the free and progressive people of the
United States must have something better, nobler,
more practical. You’d do well, therefore, to get you a
pair of rings, hang them in your ears, and go preach,
your immanent morality to the South African Pappoos.
But before you go, you shall taste of the rigour of our
law, you insolent, brazen-faced, unmannerly scoundrel!”</p>
<p>And we are assured that the Boss did not remain immobile
as be spurted forth this mixture of wrath and
wisdom, nor did the stogies; for moved by his own

words, he rose promptly to his feet. “And what of
it,” exclaims our Scribe. “Surely, I had rather see
those boots perform any office, high or low, as to behold
their soles raised like mirrors to my face.” But
how high an office they performed when the Boss came
forward, we are not told. All that our Scribe gives
out about the matter amounts to this: namely, that he
walked out of the room, and as he looked back to see
if Khalid was following, he saw him brushing with his
hands––his hips! And on that very day Khalid was
summoned to appear before the Court and give answer
to the charge of misappropriation of public funds.
The orator-dream of youth––what a realisation!
He comes to Court, and after the legal formalities are
performed, he is delivered unto an officer who escorts
him across the Bridge of Sighs to gaol. There, for
ten days and nights,––and it might have been ten
months were it not for his devoted and steadfast
friend,––we leave Khalid to brood on Democracy and
the Dowry of Democracy. A few extracts from the
Chapter in the K. L. MS. entitled “In Prison,” are,
therefore, appropriate.</p>
<blockquote><div>
<p>“So long as one has faith,” he writes, “in the general
moral summation of the experience of mankind, as the philosophy
of reason assures us, one should not despair. But
the material fact of the Present, the dark moment of no-morality,
consider that, my suffering Brothers. And reflect
further that in this great City of New York the majority of
citizens consider it a blessing to have a <i>rojail</i> (titman) for
their boss and leader.... How often have I mused
that if Ponce de Leon sought the Fountain of Youth in the
New World, I, Khalid, sought the Fountain of Truth, and
both of us have been equally successful!
</p>
<p>“But the Americans are neither Pagans––which is consoling––nor
fetish-worshipping heathens: they are all true
and honest votaries of Mammon, their great God, their one
and only God. And is it not natural that the Demiurgic
Dollar should be the national Deity of America? Have not
deities been always conceived after man’s needs and aspirations?
Thus in Egypt, in a locality where the manufacture
of pottery was the chief industry, God was represented as a
potter; in agricultural districts, as a god of harvest; among
warring tribes as an avenger, a Jehovah. And the more
needs, the more deities; the higher the aspirations, the better
the gods. Hence the ugly fetish of a savage tribe, and the
beautiful mythology of a Greek Civilisation. Change the
needs and aspirations of the Americans, therefore, and you
will have changed their worship, their national Deity, and
even their Government. And believe me, this change is
coming; people get tired of their gods as of everything else.
Ay, the time will come, when man in this America shall not
suffer for not being a seeker and lover and defender of the
Dollar....</p>
<p>“Obedience, like faith, is a divine gift; but only when it
comes from the heart: only when prompted by love and sincerity
is it divine. If you can not, however, reverence what
you obey, then, I say, withhold your obedience. And if you
prefer to barter your identity or ego for a counterfeit coin
of ideology, that right is yours. For under a liberal Constitution
and in a free Government, you are also at liberty
to sell your soul, to open a bank account for your conscience.
But don’t blame God, or Destiny, or Society, when you find
yourself, after doing this, a brother to the ox. Herein, we
Orientals differ from Europeans and Americans; we are
never bribed into obedience. We obey either from reverence
and love, or from fear. We are either power-worshippers
or cowards but never, never traders. It might be said
that the masses in the East are blind slaves, while in Europe
and America they are become blind rebels. And which is
the better part of valour, when one is blind––submission or
revolt?...</p>
<p>“No; popular suffrage helps not the suffering individual;
nor does it conduce to a better and higher morality. Why,
my Masters, it can not as much as purge its own channels.
For what is the ballot box, I ask again, but a modern vehicle
of corruption and debasement? The ballot box, believe

me, can not add a cubit to your frame, nor can it shed
a modicum of light on the deeper problems of life. Of
course, it is the exponent of the will of the majority, that is
to say, the will of the Party that has more money at its disposal.
The majority, and Iblis, and Juhannam––ah, come
out with me to the new gods!...”</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>But we must make allowance for these girds and
gibes at Democracy, of which we have given a specimen.
Khalid’s irony bites so deep at times as to get
at the very bone of truth. And here is the marrow
of it. We translate the following prophecy with
which he closes his Chapter “In Prison,” and with it,
too, we close ours.</p>
<blockquote><div>
<p>“But my faith in man,” he swears, “is as strong as my
faith in God. And as strong, too, perhaps, is my faith in
the future world-ruling destiny of America. To these United
States shall the Nations of the World turn one day for the
best model of good Government; in these United States the
well-springs of the higher aspirations of the soul shall quench
the thirst of every race-traveller on the highway of emancipation;
and from these United States the sun and moon of
a great Faith and a great Art shall rise upon mankind. I
believe this, billah! and I am willing to go on the witness
stand to swear to it. Ay, in this New World, the higher
Superman shall rise. And he shall not be of the tribe of
Overmen of the present age, of the beautiful blond beast of
Zarathustra, who would riddle mankind as they would riddle
wheat or flour; nor of those political moralists who would
reform the world as they would a parish.</p>
<p>“From his transcendental height, the Superman of America
shall ray forth in every direction the divine light, which
shall mellow and purify the spirit of Nations and strengthen
and sweeten the spirit of men, in this New World, I tell
you, he shall be born, but he shall not be an American in
the Democratic sense. He shall be nor of the Old World
nor of the New; he shall be, my Brothers, of both. In him
shall be reincarnated the Asiatic spirit of origination, of
Poesy and Prophecy, and the European spirit of Art, and the

American spirit of Invention. Ay, the Nation that leads
the world to-day in material progress shall lead it, too, in
the future, in the higher things of the mind and soul. And
when you reach that height, O beloved America, you will
be far from the majority-rule, and Iblis, and Juhannam.
And you will then conquer those ‘enormous mud Megatheriums’
of which Carlyle makes loud mention.”</p>
</div></blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
