<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER X</h2>
<h3>THE VINEYARD IN THE KAABA</h3>
</div>
<p>This, then, is the cave of our troglodyte! Allah
be praised, even the hermits of the Lebanon
mountains, like the prophets of America and other
electric-age species, are subject to the laws of evolution.
A cottage and chapel set in a vineyard, the most
beautiful we have yet seen, looms up in this rocky
wilderness like an oasis in a desert. For many miles
around, the vicinage presents a volcanic aspect, wild,
barren, howlingly dreary. At the foot of Mt. Sanneen
in the east, beyond many ravines, are villages
and verdure; and from the last terrace in the vineyard
one overlooks the deep chasm which can boast
of a rivulet in winter. But in the summer its nakedness
is appalling. The sun turns its pocket inside
out, so to speak, exposing its boulders, its little windrows
of sands, and its dry ditches full of dead fish
spawn. And the cold, rocky horizon, rising so high
and near, shuts out the sea and hides from the Hermit
the glory of the sundown. But we can behold
its effects on Mt. Sanneen, on the clouds above us,
on the glass casements in the villages far away. The
mountains in the east are mantled with etherial lilac
alternating with mauve; the clouds are touched with
purple and gold; the casements in the distance are

scintillating with mystical carbuncles: the sun is setting
in the Mediterranean,––he is waving his farewell
to the hills.</p>
<p>We reach the first gate of the Hermitage; and the
odour peculiar to monks and monkeries, a mixed
smell of mould and incense and burning oil, greets
us as we enter into a small open space in the centre
of which is a Persian lilac tree. To the right is a
barbed-wire fence shutting in the vineyard; directly
opposite is the door of the chapel; and near it is a
wicket before which stands a withered old woman.
Against the wall is a stone bench where another
woman is seated. As we enter, we hear her, standing
at the wicket, talking to some one behind the
scene. “Yes, that is the name of my husband,” says
she. “Allah have mercy on his soul,” sighs an exiguous
voice within; “pray for him, pray for him.”
And the woman, taking to weeping, blubbers out,
“Will thirty masses do, think your Reverence?”
“Yes, that will cheer his soul,” replies the oracle.</p>
<p>The old woman thereupon enters the chapel, pays
the priest or serving-monk therein, one hundred piasters
for thirty masses, and goes away in tears. The
next woman rises to the gate. “I am the mother
of––,” she says. “Ah, the mother of––,” repeats
the exiguous voice. “How are you? (She must be
an old customer.) How is your husband? How are
your children? And those in America, are they well,
are they prosperous? Yes, yes, your deceased son.
Well, h’m––h’m––you must come again. I can not
tell you anything yet. Come again next week.”

And she, too, visits the chapel, counts out some money
to the serving-monk, and leaves the Hermitage, drying
her tears.</p>
<p>The Reader, who must have recognised the squeaking,
snuffling, exiguous voice, knows not perhaps that
the Hermit, in certain moments of <i>inkhitaf</i> (abstraction,
levitation) has glimpses into the spirit-world
and can tell while in this otherworldliness how the
Christian souls are faring, and how many masses
those in Purgatory need before they can rejoin the
bosom of Father Abraham. And those who seek
consolation and guidance through his occult ministrations
are mostly women. But the money collected
for masses, let it here be said, as well as the income
of the vineyard, the Hermit touches not. The
monks are the owners of the occult establishment,
and they know better than he what to do with the
revenue. But how far this ancient religious Medium
can go in the spirit-world, and how honest he might
be in his otherworldliness, let those say who have experience
in spookery and table-rapping.</p>
<p>Now, the women having done and gone, the wicket
is open, and the serving-monk ushers us through the
dark and stivy corridor to the rear, where a few
boxes marked “Made in America”––petroleum
boxes, these––are offered us as seats. Before the
door of the last cell are a few potsherds in which
sweet basil plants are withering from thirst. Presently,
the door squeaks, and one, not drooping like
the plants, comes out to greet us. This is Father
Abd’ul-Messiah (Servitor of the Christ), as the Hermit

is called. Here, indeed, is an up-to-date hermit,
not an antique troglodyte. Lean and lathy, he is, but
not hungry-looking; quick of eye and gesture; quick
of step, too. He seems always on the alert, as if
surrounded continually with spirits. He is young,
withal, or keeps so, at least, through the grace and
ministration of Allah and the Virgin. His long unkempt
hair and beard are innocent of a single white
line. And his health? “Through my five and
twenty years of seclusion,” said he, “I have not
known any disease, except, now and then, in the
spring season, when the sap begins to flow, I am
visited by Allah with chills and fever.––No; I eat
but one meal a day.––Yes; I am happy, Allah be
praised, quite happy, very happy.”</p>
<p>And he lifts his eyes heavenward, and sighs and
rubs his hands in joyful satisfaction. To us, this
Servitor of the Christ seemed not to have passed the
climacteric. But truly, as he avowed, he was entering
the fifth lustrum beyond it. Such are the advantages
of the ascetic life, and of such ascetics the
Kingdom of Heaven. A man of sixty can carry
twenty years in his pocket, and seem all honesty, and
youth, and health, and happiness.</p>
<p>We then venture a question about the sack-cloth,
a trace of which was seen under his tunic sleeve.
And fetching a deep sigh, he gazes on the drooping
sweet basils in silence. No, he likes not to speak of
these mortifications of the flesh. After some meditation
he tells us, however, that the sack-cloth on the
first month is annoying, torturing. “But the flesh,”

he continues naïvely, “is inured to it, as the pile, in
the course of time, is broken and softened down.”
And with an honest look in his eyes, he smiled and
sighs his assurance. For his Reverence always punctuates
his speech with these sweet sighs of joy. The
serving-monk now comes to whisper a word in his
ear, and we are asked to “scent the air” a while in
the vineyard.</p>
<p>This lovely patch of terrace-ground the Hermit
tills and cultivates alone. And so thoroughly the
work is done that hardly a stone can be seen in the
soil. And so even and regular are the terrace walls
that one would think they were built with line and
plummet. The vines are handsomely trimmed and
trellised, and here and there, to break the monotony
of the rows, a fig, an apricot, an almond, or an olive,
spreads its umbrageous boughs. Indeed, it is most
cheering in the wilderness, most refreshing to the
senses, this lovely vineyard, the loveliest we have
seen.</p>
<p>Father Abd’ul-Messiah might be a descendant of
Simeon of the Pillar for all we know; but instead
of perching on the top of it, he breaks it down and
builds with its stones a wall of his vineyard. Here
he comes with his serving-monk, and we resume the
conversation under the almond tree.</p>
<p>“You should come in the grape season to taste of
my fruits,” says he.</p>
<p>“And do you like the grape?” we ask.</p>
<p>“Yes, but I prefer to cultivate it.”</p>
<p>“Throughout the season,” the serving-monk puts

in, “and though the grapes be so plentiful, he tastes
them not.”</p>
<p>“No?”</p>
<p>The Hermit is silent; for, as we have said, he is
reluctant in making such confessions. Virtue, once
bragged about, once you pride yourself upon it, ceases
to be such.</p>
<p>In his vineyard the Hermit is most thorough, even
scientific. One would think that he believed only in
work. No; he does not sprinkle the vines with holy
water to keep the grubs away. Herein he has sense
enough to know that only in <i>kabrit</i> (sulphur) is
the phylactery which destroys the phylloxera.</p>
<p>“And what do you do when you are not working
in your vineyard or praying?”</p>
<p>“I have always somewhat to do, always. For
to be idle is to open the door for Iblis. I might
walk up and down this corridor, counting the slabs
therein, and consider my time well spent.” Saying
which he rises and points to the sky. The purple
fringes of the clouds are gone to sable; the lilac tints
on the mountains are waxing grey; and the sombre
twilight with his torch––the evening star had risen––is
following in the wake of day; ’tis the hour of
prayer.</p>
<p>But before we leave him to his devotion, we ask
to be permitted to see his cell. Ah, that is against
the monastic rules. We insist. And with a h’m,
h’m, and a shake of the head, he rubs his hands caressingly
and opens the door. Yes, the Reader shall
peep into this eight by six cell, which is littered all

around with rubbish, sacred and profane. In the corner
is a broken stove with a broken pipe attached,––broken
to let some of the smoke into the room, we
are told. “For smoke,” quoth the Hermit, quoting
the Doctor, “destroys the microbes––and keeps the
room warm after the fire goes out.”</p>
<p>In the corner opposite the stove is a little altar
with the conventional icons and gewgaws and a number
of prayer books lying pell-mell around. Nearby
is an old pair of shoes, in which are stuck a few
candles and St. Anthony’s Book of Contemplations.
In the corner behind the door is a large cage, a pantry,
suspended middleway between the floor and ceiling,
containing a few earthen pots, an oil lamp, and
a jar, covered with a cloth. Between the pantry
and the altar, on a hair-mat spread on the floor,
sleeps his Reverence. And his bed is not so hard as
you might suppose, Reader; for, to serve your curiosity,
we have been rude enough to lift up a corner
of the cloth, and we found underneath a substantial
mattress! On the bed is his book of accounts, which,
being opened, when we entered, he hastened to close.</p>
<p>“You keep accounts, too, Reverence?”</p>
<p>“Indeed, so. That is a duty devolved on every
one with mortal memory.”</p>
<p>Let it not be supposed, however, that he has charge
of the crops. In his journal he keeps the accounts
of his masses? And here be evil sufficient for the
day.</p>
<p>This, then, is the inventory of Abd’ul-Messiah’s
cell. And we do not think we have omitted much

of importance. Yes; in the fourth corner, which
we have not mentioned, are three or four petroleum
cans containing provisions. From one of these he
brings out a handful of dried figs, from another a
pinch of incense, which he gives us as a token of his
love and blessing. One thing we fain would emphasise,
before we conclude our account. The
money part of this eremitic business need not be
harshly judged; for we must bear in mind that this
honest Servitor of Christ is strong enough not to
have his will in the matter. And remember, too,
that the abbey’s bills of expenses run high. If one
of the monks, therefore, is blessed with a talent for
solitude and seclusion, his brother monks shall profit
by it. Indeed, we were told, that the income of the
Hermitage, that is, the sum total in gold of the occult
and the agricultural endeavours of Abd’ul-Messiah,
is enough to defray the yearly expenditures of
the monkery. Further, we have nothing to say on
the subject. But Khalid has. And of his lengthy
lucubration on <i>The Uses of Solitude</i>, we cull the
following:</p>
<p>“Every one’s life at certain times,” writes he, “is
either a Temple, a Hermitage, or a Vineyard: every
one, in order to flee the momentary afflictions of Destiny,
takes refuge either in God, or in Solitude, or in
Work. And of a truth, work is the balm of the sore
mind of the world. God and Solitude are luxuries
which only a few among us nowadays can afford. But
he who lives in the three, though his life be that of a
silk larva in its cocoon, is he not individually considered

a good man? Is he not a mystic, though uncreative,
centre of goodness? Surely, his influence, his Me
alone considered, is living and benign, and though it
is not life-giving. He is a flickering taper under
a bushel; and this, <i>billah</i>, were better than the
pissasphaltum-souls which bushels of quackery and pretence
can not hide. But alas, that a good man by
nature should be so weak as to surrender himself entirely
to a lot of bad men. For the monks, my brother
Hermit, being a silk worm in its cocoon, will asphyxiate
the larva after its work is done, and utilise the silk.
Ay, after the Larva dies, they pickle and preserve it in
their chapel for the benefit of those who sought its
oracles in life. Let the beef-packers of America take
notice; the monks of my country are in the market
with ‘canned hermits!’</p>
<p>“And this Larva, be it remembered, is not subject
to decay; a saint does not decompose in the flesh like
mortal sinners. One of these, I have been told, dead
fifty years ago and now canonised, can be seen yet in
one of the monasteries of North Lebanon, keeping well
his flesh and bones together––divinely embalmed. It
has been truly said that the work of a good man never
dies; and these leathery hermits continue in death as in
life to counsel and console the Faithful.</p>
<p>“In the past, these Larvæ, not being cultivated for
the market, continued their natural course of development
and issued out of their silk prisons full fledged
moths. But those who cultivate them to-day are in
sore need. They have masses and indulgences to sell;
they have big bills to pay. But whether left to grow

their wings or not, their solitude is that of a cocoon
larva, narrow, stale, unprofitable to the world. While
that of a philosopher, a Thoreau, for instance, might
be called Nature’s filter; and one, issuing therefrom
benefited in every sense, morally, physically, spiritually,
can be said to have been filtered through Solitude.”</p>
<p>“The study of life at a distance is inutile; the study
of it at close range is defective. The only method
left, therefore, and perhaps the true one, is that of
the artist at his canvas. He works at his picture an
hour or two, and retires a little to study and criticise
it from a distance. It is impossible to withdraw
entirely from life and pretend to take an interest
in it. Either like my brother Hermit in these parts,
a spiritual larva in its cocoon, or like a Thoreau,
who during his period of seclusion, peeped every fortnight
into the village to keep up at least his practice
of human speech. Else what is the use of solitude?
A life of fantasy, I muse, is nearer to the
heart of Nature and Truth than a life in sack-cloth
and ashes....</p>
<p>“And yet, deeply considered, this eremitic business
presents another aspect. For does not the eremite
through his art of prayer and devotion, seek an ideal?
Is he not a transcendentalist, at least in the German
sense of the word? Is not his philosophy above all
the senses, as the term implies, and common sense included?
For through Mother Church, and with
closed eyes, he will attain the ideal, of which my
German philosopher, through the logic-mill, and with
eyes open, hardly gets a glimpse.
</p>
<p>“The devout and poetic souls, and though they
walk among the crowd, live most of their lives in
solitude. Through Mother Sorrow, or Mother
Fancy, or Mother Church, they are ever seeking the
ideal, which to them is otherwise unattainable. And
whether a howler of Turabu or a member of the
French Academy, man, in this penumbra of faith
and doubt, of superstition and imagination, is much
the same. ‘The higher powers in us,’ says Novalis,
‘which one day, as Genii, shall fulfil our will,
are for the present, Muses, which refresh us on our
toilsome course with sweet remembrances.’ And the
jinn, the fairies, the angels, the muses, are as young
and vivacious to-day as they were in the Arabian
and Gaelic Ages of Romance.</p>
<p>“But whether Mother Church or Poetry or Philosophy
or Music be the magic-medium, the result
is much the same if the motive be not religiously
sincere, sincerely religious, piously pure, lofty, and
humane. Ay, my Larva-Hermit, with all his bigotry
and straitness of soul, stands higher than most of
your artists and poets and musicians of the present
day. For a life sincerely spent between the Temple
and the Vineyard, between devotion and honest
labour, producing to one man of all mankind some
positive good, is not to be compared with the life
which oscillates continuously between egoism and
vanity, quackery and cowardice, selfishness and pretence,
and which never rises, do what it may, above
the larva state....</p>
<p>“Let every one cultivate with pious sincerity some

such vineyard as my Hermit’s and the world will
not further need reform. For through all the vapour
and mist of his ascetic theology, through the tortuous
chasm of his eremitic logic, through the bigotry
and crass superstition of his soul, I can always
see the Vineyard on the one side of his cell, and the
Church on the other, and say to myself: Here be
a man who is never idle; here be one who loves the
leisure praised by Socrates, and hates the sluggishness
which Iblis decks and titivates. And if he
crawls between his Church and his Vineyard, and
burrows in both for a solution of life, nay, spins in
both the cocoon of his ideal, he ought not to be judged
from on high. Come thou near him; descend; descend
a little and see: has he not a task, and though
it be of the taper-under-the-bushel kind? Has he not
a faith and a sincerity which in a Worm of the
Earth ought to be reckoned sublime? ‘If there were
sorrow in heaven,’ he once said to me, ‘how many
there would continuously lament the time they wasted
in this world?’</p>
<p>“O my Brothers, build your Temples and have
your Vineyards, even though it be in the rocky wilderness.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
