<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1">
					<p>A monastery in <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Lebanon, a sort of Bedlam, where the exorcising monks beat the devil out of one’s head with clouted shoes. <cite>—⁠Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2">
					<p>And the doctors here practise in the name of science what the exorcising monks practise in the name of religion. The poor devil, or patient, in either case is done to death. <cite>—⁠Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3">
					<p>Arabic Symbol. <a href="epigraph-3.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4">
					<p>Khalid would speak here of poached eggs, we believe. And the Americans, to be fair, are not so totally ignorant of the art of frying. They have lard⁠—much worse than water⁠—in which they cook, or poach, or fry⁠—but the change in the name does not change the taste. So, we let Khalid’s stricture on fried eggs and boiled cabbage stand. <cite>—⁠Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5">
					<p>In some parts of Syria, as in Arabia, almost every ill and affection is attributed to the rheums, or called so. Rheumatism, for instance, is explained by the Arab quack as a defluxion of rheums, failing to discharge through the upper orifices, progress downward, and settling in the muscles and joints, produce the affection. And might there not be more truth in that than the diagnosis of him who is a <i xml:lang="fr">Membre de la Faculté de Medicine de France</i>? <cite>—⁠Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-3-5.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
