<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Al-Khatimah</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="epilogue">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Al-Khatimah</h2>
			<p>“But I can not see all that you see.”</p>
			<p>“Then you do not love me.”</p>
			<p>“Back again to Swedenborg⁠—I told you more than once that he is not my apostle.”</p>
			<p>“Nor is he mine. But he has expressed a great truth, Jamilah. Now, can you love me in the light of that truth?”</p>
			<p>“You are always asking me that same question, Khalid. You do not understand me. I do not believe in marriage. I tried it once; I will not try it again. I am married to Bahaism. And you Khalid⁠—remember my words⁠—you will yet be an apostle⁠—the apostle⁠—of Bahaism. And you will find me with you, whether you be in Arabia, in America, or in Egypt. I feel this⁠—I know it⁠—I am positive about it. Your star and mine are one. We are born under the same star. We are now in the same orbit, approaching the same nadir. We are ruled by our stars. I believe this, and you don’t. At least, you say you don’t. But you do. You don’t know your own mind. The trend of the current of your life is beyond your grasp, beyond your comprehension. I know. And you must listen to me. You must follow my advice. If you can not come with me now to the States, you will await me here. I am called on a pressing business. And within three months, at the most, I shall return and find you waiting for me right here, in this desert.”</p>
			<p>“I can not understand you.”</p>
			<p>“You will yet.”</p>
			<p>“But why not try to understand me? Can you not find in my ideas the very essence of Bahaism? Can you not come up to my height and behold there the star that you have taken for your guide? My Truth, Jamilah, can you not see that? Love and Faith, free from all sectarianism and all earthly authority⁠—what is Bahaism or Mohammedanism or Christianity beside them? Moreover, I have a mission. And to love me you must believe in <em>me</em>, not in the Baha. You laugh at my dream. But one day it will be realised. A great Arab Empire in the borderland of the Orient and Occident, in this very heart of the world, this Arabia, this Egypt, this Field of the Cloth of Gold, so to speak, where the Male and Female of the Spirit shall give birth to a unifying faith, a unifying art, a unifying truth⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Vagaries, chimeras,” interrupted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gotfry. “Bahaism is established, and it needs a great apostle. It needs you; it will have you. I will have you. Your destiny is interwoven with mine. You can not flee it, do what you may. We are ruled by our stars, Khalid. And if you do not realise this now, you will realise it tomorrow. Here, give me your hand.”</p>
			<p>“I can not.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, then. Goodbye⁠—au revoir. In three months you will change your mind. In three months I will return to the East and find you waiting for me, even here in this desert. Think on it, and take care of yourself. Au revoir.”</p>
			<p>In this strange, mysterious manner, after pacing for hours on the sand in the sheen of the full moon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gotfry says farewell to Khalid.</p>
			<p>He sits on a rock near his tent and ponders for hours. He seeks in the stars, as it were, a clue to the love of this woman, which he first thought to be unfathomable. There it is, the stars seem to say. And he looks into the sand-grave near him, where little Najib practises how to die. Yes; a fitting symbol of the life and love called modern, boasting of freedom. They dance their dervish dance, these people, even like Khalid’s little Najib, and fall into their sand-graves, and fold their arms and smile: “We are in love⁠—or we are out of it.” Which is the same. No: he’ll have none of this. A heart as simple as this desert sand, as deep in affection as this heaven, untainted by the uncertainties and doubts and caprices of modern life⁠—only in such a heart is the love that endures, the love divine and eternal.</p>
			<p>He goes into Najma’s tent. The mother and her child are sound asleep. He stands between the bed and the cot contemplating the simplicity and innocence and truth, which are more eloquent in Najib’s brow than aught of human speech. His little hand raised above his head seems to point to a star which could be seen through an opening in the canvas. Was it his star⁠—the star that he saw in the sand-grave⁠—the star that is calling to him?⁠—</p>
			<p>But let us resume our narration.</p>
			<p>A fortnight after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gotfry’s departure Shakib leaves the camp to live in Cairo. He is now become poet-laureate to one of the big pashas.</p>
			<p>Khalid is left alone with Najma and Najib.</p>
			<p>And one day, when they are playing a game of “donkey,”⁠—Khalid carried Najib on his back, ran on all four around the tent, and Najma was the donkey-driver⁠—the child of a sudden utters a shriek and falls on the sand. He is in convulsions; and after the relaxation, lo, his right hand is palsied, his mouth awry, and his eyes asquint. Khalid finds a young doctor at al-Hayat, and his diagnosis of the case does not disturb the mind. It is infantile paralysis, a disease common with delicate children. And the doctor, who is of a kind and demonstrative humour, discourses at length on the disease, speaks of many worse cases of its kind he cured, and assures the mother that within a month the child will recover. For the present he can but prescribe a purgative and a massage of the arm and spine. On the third visit, he examines the child’s faeces and is happy to have discovered the seat and cause of the affection. The liver is not performing its function; and given such weak nerves as the child’s, a torpid liver in certain cases will produce paralysis.</p>
			<p>But Khalid is not satisfied with this. He places the doctor’s prescription in his pocket, and goes down to Cairo for a specialist. He comes, this one, to disturb their peace of mind with his indecision. It is not infantile paralysis, and he can not yet say what it is. Khalid meanwhile is poring over medical books on all the diseases that children are heir to.</p>
			<p>On the fifth day the child falls again in convulsions, and the left arm, too, is paralysed. They take him down to Cairo; and Medicine, considering the disease of his mother, guesses a third time⁠—tuberculosis of the spine, it says⁠—and guesses wrong. Again, considering the strabismus, the obliquity of the mouth, the palsy in the arms, and the convulsions, we guess closely, but ominously. Nay, Medicine is positive this time; for a fifth and a sixth Guesser confirm the others. Here we have a case of cerebral meningitis. That is certain; that is fatal.</p>
			<p>Najib is placed under treatment. They cut his hair, his beautiful flow of dark hair; rub his scalp with chloroform; keep the hot bottles around his feet, the ice bag on his head; and give him a spoon of physic every hour. “Make no noise around the room, and admit no light into it,” further advises the doctor. Thus for two weeks the child languishes in his mother’s arms; and resting from the convulsions and the coma, he would fix on Khalid the hollow, icy glance of death. No; the light and intelligence might never revisit those vacant eyes.</p>
			<p>Now Shakib comes to suggest a consultation. The great English physician of Cairo, why not call <em>him</em>? It might not be meningitis, after all, and the child might be helped, might be cured.</p>
			<p>The great guesswork Celebrity is called. He examines the patient and confirms the opinion of his confrères, rather his disciples.</p>
			<p>“But the whole tissue,” he continues with glib assurance, “is not affected. The area is local, and to the side of the ear that is sore. The strabismus being to the right, the affection must be to the left. And the pus accumulating behind the ear, under the bone, and pressing on the covering of the brain, produces the inflammation. Yes, pus is the cause of this.” And he repeats the Arabic proverb in broken Arabic, “A drop of pus will disable a camel.” Further, “Yes, the child’s life can be saved by trepanning. It should have been done already, but the time’s not passed. Let the surgeon come and make a little opening⁠—no; a child can stand chloroform better than an adult. And when the pus is out he will be well.”</p>
			<p>In a private consultation the disciples beg to observe that there was no evidence of pus behind the ear. “It is beneath the skullbone,” the Master asserts. And so we decide upon the operation. The Eye and Ear specialist is called, and after weighing the probabilities of the case and considering that the great Celebrity had said there was pus, although there be no evidence of it, he convinces Khalid that if the child is not benefited by the operation he cannot suffer from it more than he is suffering now.</p>
			<p>The surgeon comes with his assistants. Little Najib is laid on the table; the chloroform towel is applied; the scalpels, the cotton, the basins of hot water, and other accessories, are handed over by one doctor to another. The Cutter begins. Shakib is there watching with the rest; Najma is in an adjacent room weeping; and Khalid is pacing up and down the hall, his brows moistened with the cold sweat of anguish and suspense.</p>
			<p>No pus between the scalp and the bone: the little hammer and chisel are handed to the Cutter. One, two, three⁠—the child utters a faint cry; the chloroform towel is applied again;⁠—four, five, six, and the seventh stroke of the little hammer opens the skull. The Cutter then penetrates with his catheter, searches thoroughly through the brain⁠—here⁠—there⁠—above⁠—below⁠—and finally holds the instrument up to his assistants to show them that there is⁠—no pus! “If there be any,” says he, “it is beyond the reach of surgery.” The wound, therefore, is quickly washed, sewn up, and dressed, while everybody is wondering how the great Celebrity can be wrong.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Little Najib remains under the influence of anaesthetics for two days⁠—for two days he is in a trance. And on the third, the fever mounts to the danger line and descends again⁠—only after he had stretched his little arm and breathed his last!</p>
			<p>And Khalid and Najma and Shakib take him out to the desert and bury him in the sand, near the tent round which he used to play. There, where he stepped his first step, lisped his first syllable, smacked his first kiss, and saw for the first time a star in the heaven, he is laid; he is given to the Night, to the Eternity which Khalid does not fear. And yet, what tears, Shakib tells us, he shed over that little grave.</p>
			<p>But about the time the second calamity approaches, when Najma begins to decline and waste away from grief, when the relapse sets in and carries her in a fortnight downward to the grave of her child, Khalid’s eyes are as two pieces of flint stone on a sheet of glass. His tears flow inwardly, as it were, through his cracked heart.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Like the poet Saadi, Khalid once sought to fill his lap with celestial flowers for his friends and brothers; and he gathered some; but, alas, the fragrance of them so intoxicated him that the skirt dropt from his hand.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>We are again at the Mena House, where we first met Shakib. And the reader will remember that the tears rushed to his eyes when we inquired of him about his Master and Friend. “He has disappeared some ten days ago,” he then said, “and I know not whither.” Therefore, ask us not, O gentle Reader, what became of him. How can <em>we</em> know? He might have entered a higher spiritual circle or a lower; of a truth, he is not now on the outskirts of the desert: deeper to this side or to that he must have passed. And passing he continues to dream of “appearance in the disappearance; of truth in the surrender; of sunrises in the sunset.”</p>
			<p>Now, fare <em>thee</em> well in either case, Reader. And whether well or ill spent the time we have journeyed together, let us not quarrel about it. For our part, we repeat the farewell words of Sheikh Taleb of Damascus: “Judge us not severely.” And if we did not study to entertain thee as other Scribes do, it is because we consider thee, dear good Reader, above such entertainment as our poor resources can furnish, <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Wassalmu aleik</i>!</p>
			<footer>
				<p>In Freike which is in Mount Lebanon Syria on the twelfth day of January 1910 Anno Christi and the first day of Muharram 1328 Hegirah this Book of Khalid was finished</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
